

===== PAGE 1 =====

Please cite this article in press as: Kramer MA, et al., Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG frequency comodulation measures, J
Neurosci Methods (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.01.020
ARTICLE IN PRESS
+Model
NSM-4818; No. of Pages 6
Journal of Neuroscience Methods xxx (2008) xxx–xxx
Short communication
Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG frequency
comodulation measures
Mark A. Kramer a,∗, Adriano B.L. Torta,b, Nancy J. Kopella
a Department of Mathematics and Statistics & Center for BioDynamics, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
b Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Basic Health Sciences, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS 90035, Brazil
Received 15 November 2007; received in revised form 14 January 2008; accepted 18 January 2008
Abstract
Recent electroencephalogram (EEG), electrocorticogram (ECoG), and local ﬁeld potential (LFP) observations suggest that distinct frequency
bands interact. Numerous measures have been proposed to analyze such interactions, including the amplitude envelope modulation of high frequency
activity by the phase or signal of low frequency activity. In this short communication, we describe how abrupt increases or decreases in voltage
data may produce spurious coupling in these measures and suggest techniques to detect these effects.
© 2008 Elsevier B.V . All rights reserved.
Keywords: Frequency comodulation; Nesting; Theta; Gamma; Hilbert transform
1. Introduction
Rhythms appear universal in neural population voltage activ-
ity (Buzsaki, 2006) . For nearly 100 years researchers have
divided these rhythms into discrete frequency bands often
associated with physiologically distinct functions. Recent obser-
vations suggest that oscillations of different frequency are not
completely isolated, but instead interact (Jensen and Colgin,
2007). In one type of interaction the phase of lower frequency
rhythms modulates the amplitude envelope of higher frequency
rhythms. This frequency comodulation – or nesting – appears
to be a prominent characteristic of population voltage activ-
ity; it has been reported to occur between theta (approximately
4–12 Hz) and gamma (approximately 40–100 Hz) frequencies
in rat and mouse (Bragin et al., 1995; Buzs ´aki et al., 2003;
Hentschke et al., 2007) , and between theta and 30–50 Hz, and
theta and 80–150 Hz rhythms in man (Canolty et al., 2006;
Lakatos et al., 2005).
In this short communication, we show that sharp edges
in time series data (as observed in, for example, the sharp
waves of epilepsy (Niedermeyer, 1999a) , slow wave oscil-
lations (Contreras and Steriade, 1995) , and the mu rhythm
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 617 353 1493.
E-mail address: mak@bu.edu (M.A. Kramer).
(Niedermeyer, 1999b)) produce artifactual frequency comod-
ulation. To do so, we implement three frequency comodulation
measures in current use and employ three simulated examples.
We develop two examples to confuse the measures and pro-
duce spurious coupling results, and a third to exhibit the most
basic features of frequency comodulation. Our goal in this work
is not to invalidate the results of previous analysis but to alert
researchers to some pitfalls associated with frequency comodu-
lation measures. We conclude by suggesting techniques to detect
the occurrence of sharp edges in time series data. We also empha-
size the utility of simulated data in testing new measures.
2. Methods
All comodulation measures typically involve three general
steps. First, the data are bandpass ﬁltered into two frequency
intervals: a low frequency band (e.g., theta 4–12 Hz) and a higher
frequency band (e.g., gamma 40–100 Hz). Second, the instan-
taneous phase is extracted from the low frequency ﬁltered data,
and the instantaneous amplitude envelope is extracted from the
high frequency ﬁltered data by applying the Hilbert transform.
We note that the ﬁrst two steps are sometimes accomplished
by wavelets (e.g., as in Lakatos et al. (2005) and Mormann et
al. (2005)) and that the Hilbert and wavelet decompositions are
equivalent (Bruns, 2004; Le Van Quyen et al., 2001). Third, the
coupling between the low frequency phase and high frequency
0165-0270/$ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier B.V . All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.01.020

===== PAGE 2 =====

Please cite this article in press as: Kramer MA, et al., Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG frequency comodulation measures, J
Neurosci Methods (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.01.020
ARTICLE IN PRESS
+Model
NSM-4818; No. of Pages 6
2 M.A. Kramer et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods xxx (2008) xxx–xxx
amplitude envelope is determined. The method to compute this
coupling and determine its statistical signiﬁcance often distin-
guishes the different measures.
We apply three comodulation measures in this manuscript.
In the ﬁrst ( Figs. 1 b, 2b and 3b), we compute the mean and
standard deviation of the instantaneous amplitude envelope for
every 10
◦ of the instantaneous phase and plot the result(Buzs´aki
et al., 2003) . In the second ( Figs. 1c, 2c and 3c), we compare
the high frequency amplitude envelope with the low frequency
bandpass ﬁltered signal (Hentschke et al., 2007) . We note that
this measure utilizes the low frequency signal, and not the phase
(i.e., an envelope-to-signal correlation (Bruns and Eckhorn,
2004)). To determine the statistical signiﬁcance of the peak
cross-correlation between the amplitude envelope and signal,
a shufﬂing procedure of the amplitude envelope is implemented
with 100 surrogates(Hentschke et al., 2007). In the last measure
(Figs. 1d, 2d and 3d), we compute the normalized modulation
index of Canolty et al. (2006) . This measure requires that we
create a composite signal consisting of the high frequency ampli-
tude envelope and low frequency phase. We then determine the
average length of this complex vector, and compare it to a sur-
rogate distribution (200 surrogates) computed by shifting the
amplitude of the composite signal by random amounts(Canolty
et al., 2006).
We apply the comodulation measures to three sets of simu-
lated data: (i) sawtooth data, (ii) imperfect sinusoid data, and
(iii) sinusoid + high frequency noise data. For each data set,
we use a sampling interval of 1 ms and compute 12 s of
simulated data. We bandpass ﬁlter the data using a two-way
least-squares FIR ﬁlter (the eegﬁlt.m routine from the EEGLAB
toolbox (Delorme and Makeig, 2004) ), and always eliminate
the ﬁrst and last 1 s of the ﬁltered data to avoid ﬁltering arti-
facts. For (i), we create a sawtooth wave of unit amplitude and
with interval 166 ± 30 ms between successive peaks (Fig. 1a).
The linear decrease in each cycle is not instantaneous; instead,
this decrease requires from 1 to 20 ms, uniformly distributed
across all cycles. For (ii), we ﬁrst create a 6 Hz sinusoid with
unit amplitude (Fig. 2a). To each cycle of the sinusoid we add
a sharp edge that linearly increases the amplitude of the 6 Hz
oscillation by one after 1–5 ms (uniformly distributed over the
cycles). The sharp edge begins at phase values uniformly dis-
tributed between 212 and 233
◦ (cosine phase), and the unit
increase tapers to zero after 100 ms. For (iii), we ﬁrst con-
struct a sinusoidal signal of unit amplitude and with random
intervals of 166 ± 17 ms between successive peaks ( Fig. 3 a).
To each cycle, we add 50 ms of high frequency noise (uni-
formly distributed random numbers bandpass ﬁltered between
50 and 150 Hz) tapered with a Hanning window and of maxi-
mum amplitude 0.5. The onset of the noise begins at random
phases uniformly distributed between 0 and approximately 20
◦
(cosine phase) for each cycle. To all three data sets we add nor-
mally distributed random numbers with mean zero and standard
deviation 0.1.
We implement the simulated data and measures in MATLAB
(Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA). The routines to generate and
analyze the data, and produce all ﬁgures in this manuscript, are
included in the Supplementary Material.
3. Results
In this section, we show the results of applying the three
comodulation measures to the simulated data. We begin with
the sawtooth example. In Fig. 1a we show one second of data
in which the sharp edge reoccurs every 166 ± 30 ms. We ﬁl-
ter the data between 4–8 Hz (middle gray trace) and 40–100 Hz
(lower gray trace) and compute the low frequency phase (middle
black trace) and high frequency amplitude envelope (lower black
trace). To represent a sharp vertical edge requires many high fre-
quency sinusoidal components and produces localized increases
in the amplitude envelope. A close inspection ofFig. 1a suggests
that these increases occur at a particular phase of the low fre-
quency ﬁltered signal (near approximately 90
◦ for the cosine
phase). Thus, frequency comodulation occurs in this signal; the
low frequency phase and high frequency amplitude envelope are
coupled.
To verify that the comodulation measures detect this cou-
pling, we apply the three measures to the sawtooth data. We
employ the broad bandpass ﬁltering of the data (low and high
frequency bands from 4–8 Hz and 40–100 Hz, respectively) and
plot the average envelope versus phase in Fig. 1b. We ﬁnd a
large increase in this measure near 90
◦, as expected. We also
compute the envelope-to-signal measure, and show in Fig. 1c
that the largest correlations for the unshufﬂed data (black curve)
exceed those for the shufﬂed data (gray curves). We compute the
z-score for the peak correlation compared to the surrogates and
ﬁnd values greater than 5.5 ( p ≪ 0.0001). We conclude from
these two measures that frequency comodulation occurs in the
sawtooth wave between the low (4–8 Hz) and high (40–100 Hz)
frequencies and that this coupling is statistically signiﬁcant.
Using the broad bandpass ﬁltering we might overlook more
focused comodulation features. For example, does the low fre-
quency activity modulate the entire 40–100 Hz interval or a
subset of this band? To answer this question, we follow the
procedure in Canolty et al. (2006) and divide the signal into
separate low frequency bands (with frequencies from 2 to 41 Hz
in 1 Hz steps) and high frequency bands (with frequencies from
5 to 205 Hz in 5 Hz steps). We then compute the modulation
index for each pair of low and high frequency bands (a total
of 1560 pairs) and show the results in Fig. 1d. Here we plot
the z-score as a function of the phase and envelope frequen-
cies and ﬁnd large intervals of statistically signiﬁcant coupling
(with z ≥ 5, say). We make two observations about the structure
of the results. First, the largest z-scores tend to occur at phase
frequencies (vertical bands) equal to the fundamental oscilla-
tion frequency (5–8 Hz) and its harmonics: near 10–14 Hz (2nd
harmonic), 15–18 Hz (3rd harmonic), and 20–25 Hz (4th har-
monic). The reason for this is that a ﬁxed phase of the harmonic
signals also aligns with the sawtooth edge and co-occurs with
the envelope increase. Second, an abrupt increase in z-scores
occurs along a positively sloped line in Fig. 1d indicating that
higher phase frequencies require higher envelope frequencies
to exhibit signiﬁcant comodulation. This occurs because higher
phase frequencies require sharper amplitude envelopes to exhibit
signiﬁcant coupling. Consider for example a phase frequency
of 15–16 Hz. During one sawtooth cycle, this phase undergoes

===== PAGE 3 =====

Please cite this article in press as: Kramer MA, et al., Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG frequency comodulation measures, J
Neurosci Methods (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.01.020
ARTICLE IN PRESS
+Model
NSM-4818; No. of Pages 6
M.A. Kramer et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods xxx (2008) xxx–xxx 3
Fig. 1. Sawtooth wave data. (a) The simulated data (top) ﬁltered 4–8 Hz (middle gray) and ﬁltered 40–100 Hz (bottom gray). We extract the phase (middle b lack)
from the lower frequencies and the amplitude envelope (bottom black) from the higher frequencies. (b) The average amplitude envelope (black solid) and standard
deviation (gray dashed) vs. the phase. (c) The envelope-to-signal measure for the raw data (black curve) and 100 surrogates (gray curves). (d) For thecomodulation
index we plot the z-score in grayscale as a function of the phase and envelope frequencies.
Fig. 2. Imperfect sinusoid data. Careful inspection of the simulated data in (a) reveals a sharp edge and corresponding increase in the amplitude enve lope. (b) The
average amplitude envelope vs. the phase. (c) The envelope-to-signal measure. (d) The modulation index.
three complete revolutions (it is the 3rd harmonic of the funda-
mental). If the amplitude envelope is too broad and not tightly
localized to the sawtooth edge, then a nonzero envelope will
appear at the many different phase values near the sawtooth
edge. The result is an apparent lack of coupling. Conversely,
when the amplitude envelope decays quickly around the saw-
tooth edge (at fast enough envelope frequencies) only a narrow
phase interval associates with the nonzero envelope. In this case,
coupling between the phase and envelope occurs.
The sawtooth data present an extreme example of artiﬁcial
frequency comodulation resulting from a sharp edge. In these
data, high frequency oscillations do not exist. Yet we require
high frequency sinusoids to represent the sharp edge, and the
amplitude envelopes of these high frequencies couple with the
slower rhythms. As a more realistic example, we consider nearly
sinusoidal data modiﬁed to include a steep increase between 212
and 233
◦ (cosine phase). We show one second of these data, the
4–8 Hz bandpass ﬁltered data, and the 40–100 Hz bandpass ﬁl-
tered data inFig. 2a. The sharp edges produce localized increases
in the amplitude envelope, although to a lesser extent than for
the sawtooth wave. We plot the average envelope versus phase
in Fig. 2b and detect an increase for phases between −150 and
−100
◦(or equivalently between 210 and 260◦cosine phase). We
compute the envelope-to-signal measure for the broad bandpass
ﬁltered data ( Fig. 2 c) and detect a signiﬁcant peak correla-
tion (z ≈ 2.5, p< 0.05). Finally, we plot the two-dimensional
comodulation measure in Fig. 2d and ﬁnd regions of statisti-
cally signiﬁcant coupling particularly at phase frequencies near
the fundamental and its harmonics. We conclude that even a
small imperfection in the sinusoid, resulting from a sharp edge,
can produce spurious frequency comodulation results.
Of course, not all frequency comodulation results from arti-
fact. As a ﬁnal example, we consider simulated data constructed
to possess true phase coupling: a low frequency (5–7 Hz) sinu-
soid with high frequency (between 50 and 150 Hz) noise coupled
to the low frequency phase. We show one second of the unﬁl-
Fig. 3. Sinusoid + high frequency noise data. (a) During the falling phase of the sinusoid, an increase in high frequency activity occurs. (b) The amplitude envelope
vs. the phase. (c) The envelope-to-signal measure. (d) The modulation index.

===== PAGE 4 =====

Please cite this article in press as: Kramer MA, et al., Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG frequency comodulation measures, J
Neurosci Methods (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.01.020
ARTICLE IN PRESS
+Model
NSM-4818; No. of Pages 6
4 M.A. Kramer et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods xxx (2008) xxx–xxx
Fig. 4. Proposed methods to detect sharp edges in time series data. The event-related average for (a) the imperfect sinusoid and (b) the sinusoid + high frequency
noise data. The average was triggered by the peaks of successive high frequency activity. The power spectra of (c) the imperfect sinusoid and (d) the sinusoid + high
frequency noise data. Note the occurrence of harmonic spectral peaks of the fundamental 6 Hz activity in (c). The bicoherence of the imperfect sinusoid (e) and the
sinusoid + high frequency noise data (f). The phase-locked harmonic activity produces a clear effect in the bicoherence of the imperfect sinusoid.
tered and ﬁltered data inFig. 3a. For the broad bandpass ﬁltered
data, we plot the average envelope versus phase ( Fig. 3b) and
envelope-to-signal measures ( Fig. 3c) to ﬁnd statistically sig-
niﬁcant coupling (peak correlation z> 5.5, p ≪ 0.0001). The
modulation index – shown in Fig. 3d – also reveals signiﬁcant
coupling at the expected phase and envelope frequencies.
4. Discussion
In this short communication we propose that data consisting
of sharp edges may produce spurious frequency comodulation
results. We show this by applying three comodulation measures
in current use to three simulated data sets. We ﬁnd that even mod-
erate sharp edges in the data can induce artifactual frequency
comodulation. All three methods fail for the same reason: to
represent a sharp edge requires high frequency sinusoids. Thus,
although the original data do not possess high frequency oscil-
lations, the ﬁltered data do exhibit high frequency components.
An improved frequency comodulation measure would distin-
guish between high frequency oscillations and sharp edges in
the original data.
We note that wavelets (rather than bandpass ﬁltering followed
by a Hilbert transform) may also be used to extract the phase and
amplitude envelope of low and high frequency signals, respec-
tively (Lakatos et al., 2005; Mormann et al., 2005) .W eh a v e
applied the same analysis described above using the complex
Morlet wavelet to ﬁlter the data and again ﬁnd spurious fre-
quency comodulation (data not shown). We note that, for the
examples considered here, phase coupling measures (e.g., n:m
phase coupling (Palva et al., 2005; Tass et al., 1998) ) are not

===== PAGE 5 =====

Please cite this article in press as: Kramer MA, et al., Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG frequency comodulation measures, J
Neurosci Methods (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.01.020
ARTICLE IN PRESS
+Model
NSM-4818; No. of Pages 6
M.A. Kramer et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods xxx (2008) xxx–xxx 5
appropriate. The coupling occurs between the low frequency
phase and high frequency amplitude envelope, not between the
signal phases.
To ameliorate the potential problem of spurious frequency
comodulation, we recommend careful inspection of the unﬁl-
tered data to distinguish between sharp edges and true high
frequency oscillations. This inspection is usually difﬁcult; the
high frequency activity of EEG, ECoG, and LFP data are typ-
ically weak and hidden by noise. Moreover, the amplitude
envelopes of true and artifactual high frequency activity can be
quite similar (compare the lower traces ofFigs. 2a and3a). Mea-
sures that display the modulation results without normalization
(such as the average envelope versus phase measure shown in
Figs. 2b and 3b) help distinguish the magnitude of the effects;
very small values may result from subtle imperfections in sinu-
soidal activity and require a careful inspection of the data. From
the normalized envelope-to-signal and comodulation results we
cannot deduce the magnitude of the amplitude envelope. There-
fore, even weak high frequency activity – perhaps resulting from
brief sharp edges – could produce signiﬁcant coupling effects in
these normalized measures.
We conclude by suggesting four techniques to detect sharp
edges in data. First, we recommend visual inspection of the
unﬁltered data at times corresponding to increases in the ampli-
tude envelope of the high frequency activity. At these times, do
the unﬁltered data exhibit high frequency oscillations or sharp
edges? To help visualize the high frequency activity, we rec-
ommend a second technique: an event related average of the
unﬁltered data triggered by the peaks of successive high fre-
quency waves(Bragin et al., 1995). We illustrate this suggestion
in Fig. 4, where we plot the event related averages of the imper-
fect sinusoid (Fig. 4a) and sinusoid+ high frequency noise data
(Fig. 4b). The distinction between high frequency activity result-
ing from sharp edges or oscillations becomes clear in these
average results.
Third, we recommend computing the power spectrum of the
raw data and searching for harmonic peaks of the dominant
low frequency oscillation. We show the power spectra for the
imperfect sinusoid and sinusoid + high frequency noise data
in Fig. 4c and d, respectively. The sharp edges in the former
result in numerous peaks at harmonics of the fundamental fre-
quency (in this case, integer multiples of 6 Hz.) Such a power
spectrum implies sharp edges may be impacting the frequency
comodulation results.
Of course, multiple peaks in the power spectrum do not nec-
essarily indicate harmonic activity. For example, theta (near 6
Hz) and alpha (near 12 Hz) rhythms often appear in the human
EEG. Therefore, we recommend a fourth technique: computing
the bicoherence of the raw data. The bicoherence is a normalized
measure (ranging from 0 to 1) that reaches a maximum when
three frequencies ( f
1, f2, and their sum f1 + f2) maintain a
constant phase relationship (Barnett et al., 1971). We illustrate
the bicoherence for the simulated data in Fig. 4 and ﬁnd dis-
tinct results. The imperfect sinusoid ( Fig. 4e) exhibits strong
bicoherence for many frequency pairs compared to the bico-
herence of the sinusoid + high frequency noise data ( Fig. 4f).
The numerous pairs of strong bicoherence for the imperfect
sinusoid occur at the fundamental oscillation frequency (near
6 Hz) and its phase locked harmonics (12, 18, 24 Hz, etc.). For
the sinusoid + high frequency noise data, the high frequency
activity always begins at approximately the same low frequency
phase (near 0
◦). In this sense, the high and low frequency phases
are related, and it is this relationship that produces the ver-
tical and horizontal bands of strong bicoherence in Fig. 4 f.
We conclude that the bicoherence – which indicates interact-
ing frequency triplets – distinguishes these two data sets while
the frequency comodulation measures do not. A similar strat-
egy may be employed for the characteristic two-dimensional
pattern of frequency comodulation shown in Fig. 1 d. In this
two-dimensional measure, we ﬁnd the effects of coupling due to
sharp edges more apparent. These types of measures may facil-
itate detection of spurious results. We note that the bicoherence
utilizes the phase and amplitude values from three distinct fre-
quencies. We would prefer a measure focused on the quantities
of interest, namely the phase and amplitude envelope of the low
and high frequency data, respectively. In addition, more sophis-
ticated coupling measures (e.g., synchronization or causality
measures (Pereda et al., 2005) ) might help eliminate spurious
detection of coupling while still revealing true phase-envelope
correlations.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thanks Erik Edwards and Ryan
T. Canolty for comments on a preliminary version of this
manuscript. ABLT is indebted to CAPES, Brazil and the Bur-
roughs Wellcome Fund, USA for ﬁnancial support. MAK and
NJK thank the Burroughs Wellcome Fund and an NSF Research
Training Grant for ﬁnancial support.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found,
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.01.020.
References
Barnett TP, Johnson LC, Naitoh P, Hicks N, Nute C. Bispectrum analy-
sis of electroencephalogram signals during waking and sleeping. Science
1971;172:401–2.
Bragin A, Jando G, Nadasdy Z, Hetke J, Wise K, Buzsaki G. Gamma
(40–100 Hz) oscillation in the hippocampus of the behaving rat. J Neurosci
1995;15:47–60.
Bruns A. Fourier-, Hilbert- and wavelet-based signal analysis: are they really
different approaches? J Neurosci Methods 2004;137:321–32.
Bruns A, Eckhorn R. Task-related coupling from high- to low-frequency signals
among visual cortical areas in human subdural recordings. Int J Psychophys
2004;51:97–116.
Buzsaki G. Rhythms of the brain. New York: Oxford University Press; 2006.
Buzs´aki G, Buhl DL, Harris KD, Csicsvari J, Cz´eh B, Morozov A. Hippocampal
network patterns of activity in the mouse. Neuroscience 2003;116:201–11.
Canolty RT, Edwards E, Dalal SS, Soltani M, Nagarajan SS, Kirsch HE, et al.
High gamma power is phase-locked to theta oscillations in human neocortex.
Science 2006;313:1626–8.
Contreras D, Steriade M. Cellular basis of EEG slow rhythms: a study of dynamic
corticothalamic relationships. J Neurosci 1995;15:604–22.

===== PAGE 6 =====

Please cite this article in press as: Kramer MA, et al., Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG frequency comodulation measures, J
Neurosci Methods (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.01.020
ARTICLE IN PRESS
+Model
NSM-4818; No. of Pages 6
6 M.A. Kramer et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods xxx (2008) xxx–xxx
Delorme A, Makeig S. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-
trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. J Neurosci
Methods 2004;134:9–21.
Hentschke H, Perkins MG, Pearce RA, Banks MI. Muscarinic blockade weak-
ens interaction of gamma with theta rhythms in mouse hippocampus. Eur J
Neurosci 2007;26:1642–56.
Jensen O, Colgin LL. Cross-frequency coupling between neuronal oscillations.
Trends Cogn Sci 2007;11:267–9.
Lakatos P, Shah A, Knuth K, Ulbert I, Karmos G, Schroeder C.
An oscillatory hierarchy controlling neuronal excitability and stimu-
lus processing in the auditory cortex. J Neurophysiol 2005;94:1904–
11.
Le Van Quyen M, Foucher J, Lachaux J, Rodriguez E, Lutz A, Mar-
tinerie J, et al. Comparison of Hilbert transform and wavelet methods
for the analysis of neuronal synchrony. J Neurosci Methods 2001;111:83–
98.
Mormann F, Fell J, Axmacher N, Weber B, Lehnertz K, Elger CE, et al.
Phase/amplitude reset and theta–gamma interaction in the human medial
temporal lobe during a continuous word recognition memory task. Hip-
pocampus 2005;15:890–900.
Niedermeyer E. Abnormal EEG patterns: epileptic and paroxysmal. In: Nie-
dermeyer E, Lopes Da Silva F, editors. Electroencephalography: basic
principles, clinical applications and related ﬁelds. Fourth ed Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 1999a.
Niedermeyer E. The normal EEG of the waking adult. In: Niedermeyer E, Lopes
Da Silva F, editors. Electroencephalography: basic principles, clinical appli-
cations and related ﬁelds. Fourth ed Baltimore: Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins; 1999b.
Palva JM, Palva S, Kaila K. Phase synchrony among neuronal oscillations in the
human cortex. J Neurosci 2005;25:3962–72.
Pereda E, Quiroga RQ, Bhattacharya J. Nonlinear multivariate analysis of neu-
rophysiological signals. Prog Neurobiol 2005;77:1–37.
Tass P, Rosenblum M, Weule J, Kurths J, Pikovsky A, V olkmann J, et al.
Detection of n:m phase locking from noisy data: application to magnetoen-
cephalography. Phys Rev Lett 1998;81:3291.